[Unknown]: आई वी एम
[Amit Varma]: Do u have a right to interfere and use force to stop the man with the stick?
[Amit Varma]: Any reasonable person would argue that you do
[Amit Varma]: You have both the right to defend yourself, as well as others who are at the receiving end of violence
[Amit Varma]: Such as that bleeding defenceless kid
[Amit Varma]: You might have doubts about practicality of it
[Amit Varma]: The gunda could have fellow gunda's around and you could get beaten up yourself
[Amit Varma]: So you may choose not to interfere
[Amit Varma]: But there is no doubt about the morality of it
[Amit Varma]: It is right for you to intervene
[Amit Varma]: Now, here's a follow up question
[Unknown]: Economics, Politics and Behavioral Science
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen
[Amit Varma]: The political scientist A.O. Hirschman
[Amit Varma]: once said that citizens of democracies
[Amit Varma]: have three ways to respond to injustice
[Amit Varma]: by the state. We may leave,
[Amit Varma]: complain or comply.
[Amit Varma]: Well, the philosopher Jason Brennan argues
[Amit Varma]: that there is a fourth option, to resist.
[Amit Varma]: His latest book,
[Amit Varma]: When All Else Fails, argues
[Amit Varma]: that our right to self-defense and to
[Amit Varma]: defend others, holds even
[Amit Varma]: when it is the state that is the culprit.
[Amit Varma]: There should be no special privileges
[Amit Varma]: granted to the state. This is a powerful
[Amit Varma]: and thought provoking book and Jason
[Amit Varma]: agreed to come on my podcast to chat with me
[Amit Varma]: about it in March. But before
[Amit Varma]: I cut to our conversation, let's take a
[Amit Varma]: quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: This episode of the scene and the unseen
[Amit Varma]: is brought to you by Storytel. Storytel
[Amit Varma]: is an audiobook platform which you can listen to
[Amit Varma]: on your Android or iOS app. They have
[Amit Varma]: thousands of audiobooks that you can listen to
[Amit Varma]: on your mobile, including hundreds in local languages
[Amit Varma]: like Hindi and Marathi.
[Amit Varma]: An unlimited monthly subscription costs only
[Amit Varma]: Rs. 299 per month and you can also
[Amit Varma]: get a 30 day free trial if you hop on over
[Amit Varma]: to Storytel.com slash IBM.
[Amit Varma]: I actually use Storytel
[Amit Varma]: myself regularly, so as long as they sponsor
[Amit Varma]: the show, I'm going to recommend one
[Amit Varma]: book a week that I love. The book I'm going to
[Amit Varma]: recommend today is a Hindi book,
[Amit Varma]: one of many great Hindi books available on
[Amit Varma]: Storytel. This is Kashi Ka Assi
[Amit Varma]: by Kashi Nath Singh. Any
[Amit Varma]: description I give of this book will be inadequate
[Amit Varma]: so just take some time out
[Amit Varma]: and listen to it. And remember,
[Amit Varma]: you get a 30 day free trial
[Amit Varma]: only at Storytel.com
[Amit Varma]: slash IBM.
[Amit Varma]: Jason, welcome to the scene and the unseen. Thanks for having
[Amit Varma]: me. Jason, before we start
[Amit Varma]: talking about your book When All Else Fails, tell me
[Amit Varma]: a little bit about your journey
[Amit Varma]: as a philosopher. Like, you know, very few
[Amit Varma]: young people get drawn to philosophy
[Amit Varma]: calling per se. So, how did
[Amit Varma]: you sort of fall into philosophy?
[Guest]: I can actually tell you the
[Guest]: exact time when I realized
[Guest]: I wanted to become a professional philosopher.
[Guest]: It was, I think, May 2nd
[Guest]: in the year 2000. I was
[Guest]: an undergraduate and at the time I was majoring in
[Guest]: a couple other fields and I knew I had to take
[Guest]: a semester off, or at least a semester off
[Guest]: from college to earn more money to finish.
[Guest]: So, I was packing up my
[Guest]: room in my fraternity house
[Guest]: and as I'm packing up my books, I realized
[Guest]: I have all these philosophy books, even
[Guest]: though I'd only taken two philosophy classes
[Guest]: and I'd been majoring in other things.
[Guest]: So, on just a whim, I just was
[Guest]: curious, what does it take to actually become a philosophy
[Guest]: professor? So, I googled it
[Guest]: and I realized that you get to get a
[Guest]: PhD for free. In fact, they pay you
[Guest]: to go, which means that I could
[Guest]: do it. I would be able to afford to do it.
[Guest]: And so, I decided at that moment that if I didn't
[Guest]: manage to go back to college, I would switch to
[Guest]: philosophy and try to become a professional
[Guest]: philosopher. And I guess it worked
[Amit Varma]: out. And who were the sort of
[Amit Varma]: thinkers or philosophers who
[Amit Varma]: inspired you or you looked up to at that time?
[Guest]: There were
[Guest]: a number of different people. I liked David Hume,
[Guest]: I liked John Stuart Mill.
[Guest]: I tend to like the kind of consequentialist thinkers,
[Guest]: Adam Smith,
[Guest]: sort of the Scottish Enlightenment thinkers.
[Guest]: I liked Robert Nozick.
[Guest]: There were a couple, like Thomas Nagel,
[Guest]: I was a big fan of his books,
[Guest]: especially the introductory books, which would
[Guest]: talk about high-level concepts in a plain and
[Guest]: simple way. So, I was reading a lot of that
[Amit Varma]: kind of stuff. And a philosopher
[Amit Varma]: I had on the show a few months ago
[Amit Varma]: told me that one of the things about being
[Amit Varma]: a philosopher was that you kept changing
[Amit Varma]: your mind throughout your life.
[Amit Varma]: What are the important questions on which you've
[Guest]: changed your mind in the last 20 years?
[Guest]: Sure, a couple things.
[Guest]: There are some questions about the
[Guest]: nature of the mind and things where
[Guest]: I had one view and I've had others.
[Guest]: I think when I entered grad school, I was very
[Guest]: impressed by virtue ethics
[Guest]: as a theory. I thought maybe it was going to solve
[Guest]: all the problems that deontology and
[Guest]: consequentialism had. And then the more
[Guest]: I read, the more it seemed to be
[Guest]: not fulfilling its promises.
[Guest]: So, I sort of switched back to thinking
[Guest]: other kinds of views.
[Guest]: I think I've become
[Guest]: less hard-line about
[Guest]: rights and starting to think that when we
[Guest]: come to evaluate institutions, we have to
[Guest]: always think about them in partially
[Guest]: consequentialist terms and about their functionality.
[Guest]: You can't simply talk
[Guest]: about what
[Guest]: rights people have without any concern about
[Guest]: what the world would look like if those rights were
[Guest]: respected. I think
[Guest]: early on I thought that, I agreed
[Guest]: with F.A. Hayek that the concept of social justice
[Guest]: was just nonsensical,
[Guest]: that it didn't actually make sense to talk about social
[Guest]: justice, that justice applied to
[Guest]: intentional human action but not to
[Guest]: unintentional results.
[Guest]: I now think that there's a way of
[Guest]: resolving that problem and I think that
[Guest]: a concern for something that could reasonably
[Guest]: be called social justice is a test
[Guest]: of whether certain institutions
[Guest]: are valuable or not. So, those are a few
[Guest]: things. There's other stuff as well but a lot of it's
[Guest]: maybe more minor.
[Amit Varma]: Although When All Else Fails isn't really a
[Amit Varma]: libertarian book, you've written a bunch of other very
[Amit Varma]: interesting libertarian books before this.
[Amit Varma]: Now, did you sort of, were you a libertarian
[Amit Varma]: from before
[Amit Varma]: you got interested in philosophy or
[Amit Varma]: was it after you
[Amit Varma]: turned to philosophy and started asking
[Amit Varma]: yourself those big questions that you came to it?
[Guest]: I think it was definitely before.
[Guest]: It was because of economics.
[Guest]: Even though it's not the case that the average
[Guest]: economist is libertarian, they're not. They're
[Guest]: still, in some
[Guest]: sense, pretty libertarian compared to most
[Guest]: people. They favor
[Guest]: markets. There's a
[Guest]: debate about exactly how much government intervention
[Guest]: there should be into markets and a lot of that comes
[Guest]: down to the question of comparing
[Guest]: market failure to government failure.
[Guest]: So, for me, I think it was the economics
[Guest]: perspective that made me think that a lot
[Guest]: of institutions that the average person
[Guest]: disparages turn out to work pretty well
[Guest]: and a lot of the things that they offer as solutions tend
[Guest]: to backfire.
[Guest]: That said, I know I'm seen as a libertarian
[Guest]: philosopher, but aside from the book
[Guest]: Libertarianism and What Everyone Needs to Know,
[Guest]: I really don't regard my other stuff
[Guest]: as libertarian.
[Guest]: People will often read, like say I have this book called Against
[Guest]: Democracy, which made a big splash a couple
[Guest]: years ago, and people often read that as a
[Guest]: libertarian critique of democratic politics.
[Guest]: I remember I was giving a presentation
[Guest]: on this and I joked with one person after he said
[Guest]: well, unbeknownst to you, I gave you the
[Guest]: socialist version of the argument.
[Guest]: That's the copy you have.
[Guest]: I think many times I'm making arguments
[Guest]: which, if you're libertarian minded, you're
[Guest]: going to be much more sympathetic to than
[Guest]: some other people, but I never
[Guest]: rarely, I think, rely upon libertarian
[Guest]: premises or the truth of libertarianism
[Guest]: to get to the conclusions I'm arguing for.
[Guest]: I think that's true of this book too,
[Guest]: When All Else Fails. If you're a libertarian,
[Guest]: you're much more inclined to agree with this than
[Guest]: the average person, but it's not
[Amit Varma]: a libertarian book per se.
[Amit Varma]: And is the label a bit of a problem in
[Amit Varma]: being taken seriously in the discourse?
[Amit Varma]: For example, I'm known as a bit of a libertarian
[Amit Varma]: here in India, and the label
[Amit Varma]: just follows you everywhere, and sometimes you get
[Amit Varma]: the sense that there are people who just stop
[Amit Varma]: listening to what you're saying, simply because
[Amit Varma]: they attach the word libertarian to it, and they aren't
[Amit Varma]: really looking at arguments
[Amit Varma]: on their own merit.
[Amit Varma]: Which is, of course, what all of our discourse has become,
[Amit Varma]: but is that something you felt
[Guest]: that particular label?
[Guest]: I think that's true. I don't want to overstate it,
[Guest]: but there certainly is a kind of political prejudice
[Guest]: that pervades the academy.
[Guest]: And it's not simply against libertarians.
[Guest]: In, say, philosophy, if you write a Marxist
[Guest]: book, you're going to be...
[Guest]: Given that the average philosopher is kind of a moderate
[Guest]: left liberal, if you write a book
[Guest]: defending something from a Marxist point of view,
[Guest]: they're going to be prejudiced against it and less inclined
[Guest]: to take you seriously.
[Guest]: I think a lot of it... There is evidence
[Guest]: of conscious bias against
[Guest]: people with alternative political points of view.
[Guest]: There's a lot of research demonstrating that this exists.
[Guest]: And, in fact, that it exists within the academy.
[Guest]: But I think a lot of it is actually
[Guest]: unconscious.
[Guest]: Suppose
[Guest]: the average journal has, say,
[Guest]: a number of editors who are kind of
[Guest]: moderately left liberal, and you write a paper
[Guest]: that coheres with their point of view,
[Guest]: that says the kind of thing that they're inclined to believe.
[Guest]: Well, then when they read it, they're more likely
[Guest]: to think the question you're asking is interesting.
[Guest]: They're more likely to grant you some of your premises.
[Guest]: When you have people who...
[Guest]: When they read a paper that's critiquing the stuff that they believe,
[Guest]: they're a little bit more inclined to
[Guest]: send it to more negative reviewers,
[Guest]: or to dismiss it or think it's uninteresting,
[Guest]: or to not grant you some of your premises.
[Guest]: So, I think, whenever you're
[Guest]: outside the mainstream, you have
[Guest]: additional challenges to getting your stuff published.
[Guest]: On the other hand, the one
[Guest]: virtue that philosophy has compared
[Guest]: to some other fields, like, say, English,
[Guest]: which is just a mess,
[Guest]: intellectually speaking, here in the U.S.,
[Guest]: there is
[Guest]: at least a taste for the avant-garde
[Guest]: and a desire to see papers
[Guest]: which critique things that everyone believes.
[Guest]: Philosophy is the kind of field where if you write a paper
[Guest]: that says, you don't really have
[Guest]: hands, it's an illusion, people are like,
[Guest]: well, that was a clever argument.
[Guest]: You have that working for you to some degree
[Guest]: if you're defending non-mainstream views.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about the book now.
[Amit Varma]: One of the main premises of your book
[Amit Varma]: takes off from the A.O. Hirschman quote
[Amit Varma]: where he says that there are only three
[Amit Varma]: possible responses to injustice or wrongdoings
[Amit Varma]: by governments. We may leave, complain or comply.
[Amit Varma]: And your central argument of the book
[Amit Varma]: is that there is a fourth option
[Amit Varma]: and that is the option to resist, and we may
[Amit Varma]: even have a moral duty to do so.
[Amit Varma]: When did you start thinking
[Amit Varma]: about it in these terms?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you know, for us in
[Amit Varma]: India, I often say that India's biggest religion
[Amit Varma]: is not Hinduism, it's the religion of government
[Amit Varma]: because you automatically place
[Amit Varma]: government on this special high
[Amit Varma]: moral plane and look to them for
[Amit Varma]: solutions to everything, and the thought
[Amit Varma]: of resistance is
[Amit Varma]: so counterintuitive.
[Amit Varma]: How did you get drawn to these particular
[Guest]: arguments?
[Guest]: Yeah, good question. I think, I've always been
[Guest]: interested in the background question of
[Guest]: whether government has authority, whether
[Guest]: we should put government on a higher moral
[Guest]: level, and so on. But the particular question
[Guest]: of resistance was a response, I think, to the
[Guest]: problems of police violence in the United States.
[Guest]: You know, the US,
[Guest]: you may not know the statistics, but the US has
[Guest]: an unusually violent police force
[Guest]: compared to other liberal democratic
[Guest]: countries. Granted,
[Guest]: we're larger than Germany is, but
[Guest]: US police officers kill more people
[Guest]: per year than German cops fire
[Guest]: bullets, right? So that's
[Guest]: telling you something, right? They might fire
[Guest]: in a given year, outside of the firing range,
[Guest]: that is, like actually on the streets fire
[Guest]: something like 60 bullets per year in the entire
[Guest]: country of Germany. And in the US,
[Guest]: we, on average, we're
[Guest]: killing about a thousand criminals per year with
[Guest]: police officers, and that can't be
[Guest]: explained entirely by us
[Guest]: having a higher crime rate. Part of it is a higher
[Guest]: crime rate, but it's not, that's not enough to explain it.
[Guest]: So we have this very militaristic
[Guest]: and violent police force,
[Guest]: and then thanks to the preponderance of
[Guest]: cameras, now people
[Guest]: are constantly filming the kinds of things the police
[Guest]: are doing, and you can get on, like,
[Guest]: you can go online and weekly,
[Guest]: I mean, literally weekly, find an
[Guest]: egregious example of police malfeasance
[Guest]: where someone will be arrested for
[Guest]: no particularly good reason, and once they have
[Guest]: been arrested and proven innocent and
[Guest]: prone and in prostrate, they'll
[Guest]: just shoot him, like basically execute
[Guest]: a person, or use
[Guest]: violence in a case where it wouldn't make sense to use any violence
[Guest]: at all. So you have,
[Guest]: this was going along, I started thinking about,
[Guest]: well, what would be the appropriate response to this
[Guest]: situation? Not necessarily strategically,
[Guest]: but I just was wondering, if you saw a
[Guest]: police officer doing this kind of stuff,
[Guest]: would you be allowed to shoot him, to stop him?
[Guest]: And, like, morally speaking,
[Guest]: would it be permissible? Not would it be
[Guest]: probably wouldn't be. If you shoot a police,
[Guest]: there was a guy named Eric Garner, and
[Guest]: police officers just choked him to death
[Guest]: for selling cigarettes on the streets.
[Guest]: He didn't need to do that. They used excessive
[Guest]: violence against him. If you
[Guest]: saw police officers doing that, could you
[Guest]: shoot them? They would probably send a SWAT team
[Guest]: to come kill you if you did, so I wouldn't recommend doing it,
[Guest]: but would it be permissible to? And then
[Guest]: once I started thinking about that, I started thinking about
[Guest]: other kinds of government malfeasance.
[Guest]: If the US government's planning
[Guest]: to engage in a drone strike against a
[Guest]: target that's mostly made up of innocent people,
[Guest]: if it's spying on us,
[Guest]: if it's doing other kinds of bad behaviors,
[Guest]: what sorts of resistance are morally
[Guest]: permissible? And then the book kind of, I wrote
[Guest]: an article about it, and I even
[Guest]: wrote an article about lying to
[Guest]: voters. So,
[Guest]: President Obama was accused of lying to
[Guest]: Ohio voters about NAFTA.
[Guest]: There's a scene where, it's not really clear whether
[Guest]: this happened or not, I've been trying to verify it,
[Guest]: it's not clear, but supposedly he's in Ohio
[Guest]: saying, I'm going to renegotiate NAFTA
[Guest]: and get rid of free trade, and then as he's doing
[Guest]: that, his advisor, the Chicago
[Guest]: economist, Austin Goolsbee, is
[Guest]: in Canada saying, no, no, he doesn't really
[Guest]: mean that, we're just saying that because voters are stupid,
[Guest]: but we're not really going to do that. And then when
[Guest]: people heard that, they were outraged, and my reaction
[Guest]: was, oh, that's a sensible thing to do,
[Guest]: like, why should, if Ohio voters
[Guest]: are so stupid and they're going to make these bad choices,
[Guest]: like, it's good that the president lies to them
[Guest]: to protect me and my children from these bad
[Guest]: voters. So I wrote a paper basically
[Guest]: defending that kind of behavior,
[Amit Varma]: and then it turned into the book.
[Amit Varma]: You know, your last chapter, kind of towards the end of the book,
[Amit Varma]: you deal with the whole ethic of lying to
[Amit Varma]: voters and all, since you brought it up, a question
[Amit Varma]: I
[Amit Varma]: had regarding that is that
[Amit Varma]: isn't it, for democracy to function,
[Amit Varma]: shouldn't it be normatively
[Amit Varma]: desirable to not lie to voters?
[Amit Varma]: I buy your argument that sometimes voters are
[Amit Varma]: stupid, you might have bigoted voters
[Amit Varma]: who want war with the neighboring country, and you lie
[Amit Varma]: to them, and you come to power, and you do the good things,
[Amit Varma]: and blah, blah, blah, but there is
[Amit Varma]: a danger there that, A, if you are
[Amit Varma]: the politician doing that, you are just rationalizing
[Amit Varma]: your lying, and beyond the
[Amit Varma]: point what your final beliefs are don't really
[Amit Varma]: matter, but also beyond that,
[Amit Varma]: if democracy is to function,
[Amit Varma]: shouldn't it be considered wrong
[Amit Varma]: to lie to voters regardless of what the reasons
[Guest]: for that might be?
[Guest]: There's a couple questions packed in there. So one is
[Guest]: like, how should democracy actually function?
[Guest]: And what should happen is
[Guest]: people should have a good sense of what
[Guest]: their interests are, and also have a concern for other
[Guest]: people's interests. They should form
[Guest]: beliefs about policy, and which politicians
[Guest]: to support, based upon
[Guest]: evidence, and
[Guest]: the best available social scientific
[Guest]: and scientific evidence. And then they
[Guest]: should pick policies on a basis, and vote for people
[Guest]: who they think, reasonably think,
[Guest]: in light of that evidence, will do the best job implementing
[Guest]: the policies that support their ends.
[Guest]: And when everybody votes that way, we'll get
[Guest]: some kind of compromise position, which promotes
[Guest]: everyone's interest. So that's
[Guest]: the normative model of democracy that most people
[Guest]: work with. So the problem with that
[Guest]: is, none of that's true.
[Guest]: None of it is true. Very few
[Guest]: voters vote ideologically. Very few
[Guest]: voters have strong opinions about
[Guest]: politics. Most of the time
[Guest]: when voters support a particular political party,
[Guest]: they do so on
[Guest]: non-cognitive grounds. So in the same way
[Guest]: that I support the Boston Red Sox
[Guest]: as a baseball team, not because I
[Guest]: rationally chose them, but because
[Guest]: I happen to grow up in the Boston area,
[Guest]: you find that voters
[Guest]: typically support a party simply because
[Guest]: that's what people like them do.
[Guest]: And the fact that people like them do it has nothing
[Guest]: to do with the party's tendency to support
[Guest]: their interests. So
[Guest]: Irish people,
[Guest]: Boston Irish people tend to vote for the Democrats
[Guest]: in the United States, not because the Democrats
[Guest]: are especially good for Boston Irish people,
[Guest]: or because they support their ideology,
[Guest]: but just by historical
[Guest]: circumstance. Voters are ignorant,
[Guest]: they're irrational, they're not voting on the basis of
[Guest]: information. So you're already
[Guest]: missing that piece of it, and then politicians
[Guest]: can make certain bad choices in light of that.
[Guest]: So I think when we're asking
[Guest]: what are the ethics of democracy,
[Guest]: we have to ask how should we
[Guest]: respond to democracy as it is,
[Guest]: not what would be the ethical obligations
[Guest]: if democracy worked the way it's supposed to.
[Guest]: Now you're right about one thing.
[Guest]: In this book I say, I'm trying to give
[Guest]: conditions under which it's permissible
[Guest]: to lie, to deceive, to sabotage,
[Guest]: to destroy, or even to use violence
[Guest]: against other people. And there's
[Guest]: a danger with any of these principles, which is that
[Guest]: people might misapply them.
[Guest]: They might not understand when to apply them, and they might
[Guest]: even give themselves permission to use it
[Guest]: the wrong way.
[Guest]: And that's basically true of ethics in general.
[Guest]: So if I tell you, if somebody
[Guest]: is beating you up, you're allowed to fight back.
[Guest]: You're allowed to engage in self-defense.
[Guest]: Just forget about government for a moment, forget about
[Guest]: democracy. Just say, on the schoolyard
[Guest]: if a kid attacks you, and it's necessary
[Guest]: to use violence to defend yourself,
[Guest]: that's the truth about ethics.
[Guest]: Once I tell that to a seven-year-old,
[Guest]: he might very well convince himself
[Guest]: that when he's picking on somebody else, that it's actually
[Guest]: self-defense. When we tell governments,
[Guest]: when we hand governments just war
[Guest]: theories, like forget about the work I'm doing,
[Guest]: take the typical theory of just war
[Guest]: that, say, a philosopher would
[Guest]: defend, every theory of just war
[Guest]: says that violence can only be used
[Guest]: in self-defense. You hand that to
[Guest]: George W. Bush in 2003,
[Guest]: and he's able to rationalize
[Guest]: to himself that attacking Iraq
[Guest]: counts as a form of self-defense.
[Guest]: That's a problem with the people
[Guest]: and misapplying the theory, but it doesn't make
[Guest]: the theory wrong.
[Guest]: There's one other thing I'd
[Guest]: add to that, which is, if you call
[Guest]: this objection the dangerous misapplication
[Guest]: objection, the idea that you have
[Guest]: to keep this theory quiet because people
[Guest]: might use it the wrong way, I think that applies
[Guest]: even more strongly to the
[Guest]: other side. If you look at the
[Guest]: psychology of what people are like,
[Guest]: people are overly deferential
[Guest]: to authority. They have a tendency
[Guest]: to do whatever they're told to do. They don't
[Guest]: fight back. They don't resist.
[Guest]: If a government comes to power and they
[Guest]: say, we're going to throw all Japanese people in
[Guest]: concentration camps, the typical person says,
[Guest]: sure, no problem. If they say, we're going to
[Guest]: throw all Jewish people in concentration camps
[Guest]: and we need you to execute them, they
[Guest]: do it. If you put people in
[Guest]: the Milgram experiment, you take the average
[Guest]: person, put them in an
[Guest]: experiment, get a person in a white lab
[Guest]: coat to tell them to electrocute another person
[Guest]: to death, they'll do it. So if anything,
[Guest]: I think the opposite side
[Guest]: is even more dangerous
[Guest]: than my side. We know people are overly
[Guest]: deferential to authority, so we have to be very
[Guest]: careful about telling them that they should
[Amit Varma]: respect authority.
[Amit Varma]: You could also then argue that
[Amit Varma]: being deferential to authority is actually
[Amit Varma]: hardwired into us. And what you are
[Amit Varma]: asking is also an act of resistance
[Amit Varma]: against a hardwiring.
[Guest]: I think there is evidence that
[Guest]: this tendency to defer to authority is
[Guest]: nearly universal. It does vary a bit
[Guest]: from culture to culture, but it's so prevalent
[Guest]: everywhere that it doesn't seem like it's merely
[Guest]: a cultural artifact. Maybe
[Guest]: there's some sort of evolutionary explanation for it
[Guest]: about going along with
[Amit Varma]: the group, why that happened.
[Amit Varma]: I'll get to the premise of your book.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, your book essentially argues
[Amit Varma]: against what you call the special
[Amit Varma]: immunity thesis and argues for
[Amit Varma]: what you call the moral parity thesis.
[Amit Varma]: Can you explain these for us?
[Guest]: Sure. So the moral parity
[Guest]: thesis and the special immunity thesis are a question about
[Guest]: when can you use
[Guest]: defensive actions against government
[Guest]: agents. So defensive actions
[Guest]: mean things like deception,
[Guest]: like lying, deception,
[Guest]: sabotage, destruction, or
[Guest]: violence against another person.
[Guest]: So normally these actions are
[Guest]: not permissible. I can't just go up and attack
[Guest]: a person. I'm not normally supposed to lie to
[Guest]: people. But you are allowed to use these
[Guest]: things in self-defense or defense of
[Guest]: others. And there's a whole theory about exactly
[Guest]: when this gets activated.
[Guest]: So the special immunity
[Guest]: thesis is the thesis that it seems most
[Guest]: people believe. The special immunity thesis
[Guest]: says that the conditions under
[Guest]: which you can use defensive actions
[Guest]: against government agents who are acting
[Guest]: ex officio, like in
[Guest]: the capacity of their office,
[Guest]: are much more stringent than
[Guest]: the conditions under which you can use self-defense
[Guest]: against me. The
[Guest]: moral parity thesis says, nope, they're one
[Guest]: and the same. The conditions under which you can use
[Guest]: defensive actions against government agents
[Guest]: are exactly the same as the conditions under
[Guest]: which you can use self-defense against me.
[Guest]: So one is saying,
[Guest]: the moral parity thesis says self-defense against
[Guest]: civilians and government agents is exactly
[Guest]: on par. They're governed by exactly the same
[Guest]: principles. You treat them exactly the same.
[Guest]: And the special immunity thesis says
[Guest]: that government agents have
[Guest]: some sort of extra moral
[Guest]: permission and you have an obligation
[Guest]: to defer to them in ways where you can't
[Guest]: use self-defense against them or you can't defend
[Guest]: others against them, though if
[Guest]: a civilian were doing exactly the same thing,
[Amit Varma]: you'd be allowed to intervene.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you've given a number of thought experiments
[Amit Varma]: in your book about all of these. I'll just
[Amit Varma]: read out a couple of them to sort of get your point
[Amit Varma]: across. One is
[Amit Varma]: called Shooter in the Park. A masked man emerges
[Amit Varma]: from a black van holding a rifle.
[Amit Varma]: He starts shooting at children in a public park
[Amit Varma]: and a bystander has a gun.
[Amit Varma]: She kills him before he kills any innocent
[Amit Varma]: children. And your other example
[Amit Varma]: is called Minivan Shooter.
[Amit Varma]: A man witnesses a police officer stop
[Amit Varma]: a minivan with a female driver and three
[Amit Varma]: children in the back and sees that the driver
[Amit Varma]: has nothing in her hands and her hands are on the
[Amit Varma]: steering wheel. The police officer emerges
[Amit Varma]: from his car and starts shooting at the van's
[Amit Varma]: windows. Anne has a gun. She
[Amit Varma]: fires at the police officer before
[Amit Varma]: he shoots any of the children. Now, leaving
[Amit Varma]: questions of practicality aside, as you
[Amit Varma]: just pointed out that it would be impractical
[Amit Varma]: to shoot at the police officer because
[Amit Varma]: you know, you'd immediately have a special
[Amit Varma]: task force send after you. But
[Amit Varma]: your argument is that both
[Amit Varma]: these situations are identical
[Amit Varma]: and the fact that the guy with a gun is wearing
[Amit Varma]: a police uniform in the second
[Amit Varma]: instance doesn't change that. You have an
[Amit Varma]: equal right to defend
[Amit Varma]: the children against both people.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's right. The claim is
[Guest]: that the moral parity thesis says
[Guest]: if you can use self-defense in the first case
[Guest]: with a civilian, you can use it in the second case
[Guest]: with a police officer. And the special
[Guest]: immunity thesis will say, no, there's some reason
[Guest]: why you can't use it against the police officer
[Guest]: but you can in the first case.
[Guest]: And by the way, most of these cases
[Guest]: that you have in the book are based upon
[Guest]: real-life cases in the United States.
[Guest]: Some of them I had to take out the reference
[Guest]: because we were worried about lawsuits.
[Guest]: Even though almost all these cases
[Guest]: you can actually watch it happen
[Guest]: with a video. So the minivan shooter,
[Guest]: there's a video of a police officer doing this
[Guest]: and shooting at the children.
[Guest]: Nevertheless, because people dispute
[Guest]: the accusation, we just had to
[Guest]: take out some of the references
[Guest]: to real-life people.
[Guest]: Similarly, I give an example of
[Guest]: the Rodney King
[Guest]: beating versus another beating.
[Guest]: The first case is something like, one of your friends
[Guest]: is at a party and he gets to be drunk
[Guest]: and starts making a mess, and so people
[Guest]: subdue him. But then even after he's subdued
[Guest]: and he's no longer a danger to anybody,
[Guest]: they're just mad at him, so they beat the hell out of him.
[Guest]: And then I ask, if you saw
[Guest]: that happening, if you saw them just beating this man
[Guest]: senseless after they've
[Guest]: stopped him from being a danger, you probably think
[Guest]: it's permissible to intervene. We'll now make
[Guest]: it the same thing, but it's the Rodney King beating
[Guest]: in the United States, where he was drunk driving,
[Guest]: drunk driving is dangerous, it was right to stop
[Guest]: him, but having stopped him, they
[Guest]: then just continually beat
[Guest]: him even after he's no longer any possible
[Guest]: threat to anybody. So my
[Guest]: question is, could you, like
[Guest]: suppose you're standing there and you see them doing this
[Guest]: and you could somehow intervene. You could fire
[Guest]: a couple shots at them to scare them, or you could
[Guest]: shoot them to stop them. Would it be permissible
[Guest]: to do so? And I think the answer is yes.
[Guest]: Or another case involves drugs.
[Guest]: If I, Jason Brennan, were to
[Guest]: decide that I don't think anyone should, like
[Guest]: I go to Colorado and I say
[Guest]: here in Colorado marijuana is legal,
[Guest]: but I don't think people should smoke pot, so I'm
[Guest]: going to, anyone who has marijuana, I'm
[Guest]: going to kidnap you and put you in my basement for
[Guest]: 30 days, and I'm going to take $300
[Guest]: out of your bank account.
[Guest]: You would think that that is permissible
[Guest]: to fight violently against me to stop
[Guest]: me from doing that. If the government says
[Guest]: the same thing, then people think they
[Guest]: have to defer to it. I don't think you do.
[Amit Varma]: I think you can treat them the same.
[Amit Varma]: And you've got an entire chapter
[Amit Varma]: on the right to self-defense and how
[Amit Varma]: it's been, how the common law is basically
[Amit Varma]: codified by
[Amit Varma]: how they arise out of our common sense
[Amit Varma]: moral intuitions. And that phrase struck me because
[Amit Varma]: it also struck me that while it is
[Amit Varma]: common sense moral intuition and therefore
[Amit Varma]: codified into law that we have a right to
[Amit Varma]: defend ourselves and others,
[Amit Varma]: it is equally common sense
[Amit Varma]: moral intuition that there is a
[Amit Varma]: line that is drawn when someone
[Amit Varma]: in authority, authority again
[Amit Varma]: in court marks, and we'll come to that word later,
[Amit Varma]: but if it's someone from the government or
[Amit Varma]: an officer of the law, why do you think
[Amit Varma]: that is the case? Why do you think that our
[Amit Varma]: moral intuitions, if it is the case,
[Amit Varma]: why do you think that that's the way it is that
[Amit Varma]: our moral intuitions tend to draw
[Amit Varma]: that line and
[Amit Varma]: sort of tend to go with the
[Amit Varma]: special immunity thesis? Yeah, good.
[Guest]: You know, a couple of things about that. One is,
[Guest]: it's true that commonsensically
[Guest]: we think we have certain rights of self-defense,
[Guest]: and then also commonsensically we tend to believe in
[Guest]: special immunity. So,
[Guest]: one way I see what philosophy is doing is this,
[Guest]: every person has
[Guest]: a number of moral beliefs, and these
[Guest]: moral beliefs are not consistent.
[Guest]: Very few people have fully consistent moral
[Guest]: beliefs. So what philosophy is
[Guest]: often doing is saying to the reader,
[Guest]: you think A, you also think B.
[Guest]: You believe one thing, you also believe this other thing.
[Guest]: These two things can't both
[Guest]: be true. You're calling attention
[Guest]: to conflicts in people's beliefs, and then you're
[Guest]: trying to say, so to resolve them, you're going to have to give
[Guest]: something up. Which of these beliefs is the one that you
[Guest]: should hold on to? So in a sense, what I'm doing
[Guest]: in the whole book is to say, you think
[Guest]: that self-defense is permissible under these circumstances,
[Guest]: you also think that you should treat cops
[Guest]: and congresspeople differently.
[Guest]: I'm going to show you there's a lot of tension
[Guest]: between these two things. Then I'm going to
[Guest]: look through every possible explanation,
[Guest]: like philosophically
[Guest]: good explanation for treating cops
[Guest]: and congresspeople differently, and if none of them survive,
[Guest]: then we should just, by default, go back to
[Guest]: thinking that they're not different, that we should treat them the same.
[Guest]: That said,
[Guest]: as far as the belief in authority, I think there's a few
[Guest]: things going here. One is that
[Guest]: we evolved to live in
[Guest]: small tribal bands of about 120
[Guest]: members or less, and
[Guest]: what was really important for our survival
[Guest]: through most of human history
[Guest]: was to be able to demonstrate intense
[Guest]: loyalty to your group.
[Guest]: Your own survival depended upon
[Guest]: loyalty to your group and
[Guest]: enmity against your out-group.
[Guest]: That often leads to conformist
[Guest]: behavior. Making sure
[Guest]: you believe the same things as others,
[Guest]: you engage in certain kinds of expensive
[Guest]: rituals, that you belong to the same religion.
[Guest]: These are expensive signaling
[Guest]: devices that prove your loyalty.
[Guest]: I think we've been evolved to be somewhat conformist.
[Guest]: Beyond that, we get
[Guest]: indoctrinated into conformity through
[Guest]: our entire childhood. Governments put
[Guest]: up very fancy-looking buildings with
[Guest]: fancy symbols. They wear fancy uniforms.
[Guest]: Schooling is controlled by governments
[Guest]: and they tell you that you should obey the
[Guest]: government and do what it says.
[Guest]: They sometimes misread
[Guest]: history in a way that makes you more in favor
[Guest]: of government. So I think we get a
[Guest]: combination of cultural indoctrination into
[Guest]: deference to authority, plus
[Guest]: there's probably some natural
[Guest]: tendency towards it anyways.
[Amit Varma]: Now a large chunk of your book is, the approach
[Amit Varma]: you've taken in the book, is that you've taken
[Amit Varma]: a lot of the common and strongest
[Amit Varma]: arguments which would
[Amit Varma]: seem to support that governments have that
[Amit Varma]: special moral force field, as you called it, around
[Amit Varma]: them. Arguments for the special immunity
[Amit Varma]: thesis, and you break them down
[Amit Varma]: one by one. And the most
[Amit Varma]: interesting chapter I found for me
[Amit Varma]: was the one which dealt
[Amit Varma]: with the questions of the
[Amit Varma]: legitimacy of the state and the authority
[Amit Varma]: of the state, where you conclude
[Amit Varma]: that even if a government is
[Amit Varma]: legitimate, that doesn't necessarily
[Amit Varma]: give it authority over you.
[Amit Varma]: So can you explain that and parse
[Guest]: those terms for me?
[Guest]: Sure. So these words are used differently
[Guest]: by different philosophers. To some degree,
[Guest]: these are stipulations.
[Guest]: Everyone agrees that what's
[Guest]: supposed to make government interesting is that it
[Guest]: has two special moral powers.
[Guest]: And I'm going to call these moral powers legitimacy
[Guest]: and authority. If you don't like those words, you can use something else.
[Guest]: Legitimacy refers
[Guest]: to a moral
[Guest]: permission to create and enforce
[Guest]: rules by fiat. So
[Guest]: governments can create a rule and they can use
[Guest]: violence and threats of violence to enforce
[Guest]: these rules over certain people within
[Guest]: a certain geographic area.
[Guest]: And authority is another moral
[Guest]: power, which is supposed to be that when a government
[Guest]: creates these rules, it
[Guest]: also creates in you an obligation
[Guest]: to obey the rule.
[Guest]: And what I want to note is that there's a question about whether
[Guest]: any governments are legitimate and whether
[Guest]: any are authoritative, but I also know that these are
[Guest]: independent powers.
[Guest]: It's possible to be legitimate without authority,
[Guest]: and it's possible to be authoritative without legitimacy,
[Guest]: at least conceptually speaking.
[Guest]: So imagine, I don't think
[Guest]: pacifism is true, but for the sake of argument,
[Guest]: imagine that pacifism is true.
[Guest]: You're never allowed to use violence ever.
[Guest]: You're never allowed to use coercion ever to get
[Guest]: people to do what you want. Then you can
[Guest]: still have a society where
[Guest]: let's say there's a kind of philosopher
[Guest]: queen and she issues orders
[Guest]: and suppose because she's all wise and all
[Guest]: knowing, when she issues an order, you should
[Guest]: follow it. She's telling you to do the right thing.
[Guest]: In that society, she would have
[Guest]: authority, but because pacifism is
[Guest]: by hypothesis true, she's not allowed
[Guest]: to use any kind of coercion to enforce
[Guest]: her rules. So that would be a situation in which
[Guest]: she's authoritative but not legitimate.
[Guest]: Now to imagine the question about legitimacy
[Guest]: without authority.
[Guest]: When you think about a boxing match,
[Guest]: if you and I were to have a fist fight like in a boxing
[Guest]: match, we've agreed that we're allowed to punch
[Guest]: each other, so we have permission to punch each other.
[Guest]: But when I go to punch you, you don't
[Guest]: have any obligation to let me punch you.
[Guest]: You're allowed to block and evade the strike.
[Guest]: My punching would be legitimate but not
[Guest]: authoritative. Maybe governments are like
[Guest]: that too. Maybe it's permissible for governments
[Guest]: to create and enforce certain rules,
[Guest]: but there's not a duty per se to
[Guest]: obey the law. And what's odd is that
[Guest]: when you look at the people
[Guest]: who are writing about government authority,
[Guest]: it's pretty clear that philosophers
[Guest]: have spent the last 2,500 years
[Guest]: trying to come up with an answer
[Guest]: to the question of should you obey
[Guest]: the law. And all
[Guest]: of the arguments fail. They're all bad
[Guest]: arguments, like arguments based upon consent,
[Guest]: arguments based on hypothetical consent,
[Guest]: on other sorts of things. None of these really seem to
[Guest]: show you have an obligation to obey the law.
[Guest]: So I think the most common position now
[Guest]: in philosophy might be what
[Guest]: John Simmons calls philosophical anarchism,
[Guest]: which isn't really anarchist.
[Guest]: It's a bad title, but it really means some
[Guest]: governments are legitimate, but none have authority.
[Guest]: Maybe it's okay for the US
[Guest]: government to make certain rules,
[Guest]: but I don't actually have to obey them.
[Guest]: And also, one complication
[Guest]: here about obeying the law,
[Guest]: we have to distinguish between obeying the law because
[Guest]: it's the law and obeying it
[Guest]: because of independent rules.
[Guest]: So if I walk down the street
[Guest]: and I start saying to my neighbors,
[Guest]: I, Jason Brennan, hereby order you
[Guest]: not to murder anyone,
[Guest]: well, they would have an obligation not to murder
[Guest]: anyone, but they don't have an obligation to
[Guest]: avoid murdering people because I said so.
[Guest]: It's just they have a pre-existing moral obligation.
[Guest]: So for a government to have authority,
[Guest]: it has to be able to create obligations
[Guest]: where there were none or create a new
[Guest]: ground for obligations where there wasn't one
[Guest]: before. It has to be, you have to
[Guest]: obey the law because it's the law,
[Guest]: not because there's some independent moral obligation
[Amit Varma]: that happens to track.
[Amit Varma]: Right, so essentially you'd say that, look, all
[Amit Varma]: reasonable democratic governments
[Amit Varma]: with a constitution in place and so on
[Amit Varma]: can be reasonably considered
[Amit Varma]: legitimate, but none have authority.
[Amit Varma]: Are there any duties that a citizen
[Amit Varma]: has towards
[Amit Varma]: her government which wouldn't
[Amit Varma]: apply to duties against other people?
[Amit Varma]: Like, of course, we have, you could say that
[Amit Varma]: we have to respect the negative rights of everybody,
[Amit Varma]: but are there any duties
[Amit Varma]: which we have towards government itself per se?
[Guest]: Well, one thing about this is even though I'm
[Guest]: skeptical about there being any authority
[Guest]: whatsoever, I don't really
[Guest]: need that for my argument to go through
[Guest]: because some of the best
[Guest]: arguments for government authority, just they don't
[Guest]: get you very far in terms of this debate.
[Guest]: So, for example, the philosopher H. L.
[Guest]: A. Hart, a great philosopher of
[Guest]: law, he argued for something called the
[Guest]: fair play theory. The fair play theory says
[Guest]: that if there's some sort of public
[Guest]: good being created by your neighbors,
[Guest]: then you have to do your part to
[Guest]: support it. Like, I don't know, roads
[Guest]: and maybe some sort of welfare system or
[Guest]: maybe some sort of schooling system or perhaps
[Guest]: national defense. Your neighbors
[Guest]: are putting up money to provide these things.
[Guest]: You benefit tremendously from them. You'd rather
[Guest]: not pay because you'd rather get it for free,
[Guest]: but you recognize that the value
[Guest]: you get from having them is higher than the cost
[Guest]: you do. He thinks under these sorts of
[Guest]: circumstances, you have an obligation to
[Guest]: do your part, right? Which,
[Guest]: for the sake of argument, let's just grant him he's right
[Guest]: about that. If he's right about that, that implies
[Guest]: things that I should pay some
[Guest]: taxes. If I get called to jury duty,
[Guest]: maybe I should be required to serve.
[Guest]: Maybe under a genuine
[Guest]: national emergency,
[Guest]: I should agree to allow myself
[Guest]: to be conscripted into the army. So,
[Guest]: I could grant him all of that,
[Guest]: but it doesn't get you to
[Guest]: defense of the cases where I think you
[Guest]: can use self-defense against government
[Guest]: because he'd have to say something like,
[Guest]: well,
[Guest]: basically, this is almost a quote from the book,
[Guest]: it seems bizarre to say, you benefit from
[Guest]: some of the public goods the state supplies.
[Guest]: In order to avoid unfairly
[Guest]: free-riding on the efforts of others to provide
[Guest]: those public goods, you must not only pay
[Guest]: your taxes and serve on jury duty,
[Guest]: but you must allow the president to exterminate
[Guest]: and forcibly relocate Native
[Guest]: American tribes. You must let police
[Guest]: officers choke, subdue, and handcuff
[Guest]: men in ways that result in their deaths.
[Guest]: You must allow Congress to wage war against
[Guest]: whomever it likes. You must allow the police
[Guest]: to arrest you for smoking pot or for selling
[Guest]: big gulps. The thing with all these
[Guest]: other cases, they have nothing to do with paying your
[Guest]: fair share, playing fair, or avoiding free-riding.
[Guest]: They go far beyond what his argument
[Guest]: can prove. So, I could grant that
[Guest]: you have some basic obligations towards
[Guest]: government, towards your fellow citizens to maintain
[Guest]: a good government, but
[Guest]: the burden that the other side
[Guest]: has is they have to say, it's not only authoritative
[Guest]: for the government to tax you and to
[Guest]: pass a couple rules which genuinely
[Guest]: promote the public good, but the government
[Guest]: has the authority to have police officers
[Guest]: kill people who are subdued. The government
[Guest]: has the authority to take away your rights
[Guest]: over your body. The government has the authority
[Guest]: over you to wage war
[Guest]: against others or to spy on you and so on.
[Guest]: And their arguments don't get anywhere
[Amit Varma]: near that. And you address
[Amit Varma]: some of the common arguments against
[Amit Varma]: the argument for authority, like the
[Amit Varma]: consent arguments, for example.
[Amit Varma]: Can you briefly take us through the major
[Amit Varma]: arguments for
[Amit Varma]: arguing for government authority and what your
[Guest]: objections to them are? Sure. So,
[Guest]: the argument that people get taught
[Guest]: in the US by, like, when you take
[Guest]: your 6th grade civics class, they tell you,
[Guest]: well, the wonderful thing about democracy is that
[Guest]: it's a government by the consent of the people.
[Guest]: The problem with that is that we know
[Guest]: that that's wrong, and we've known, we philosophers
[Guest]: have known that was wrong before there were any
[Guest]: of the major modern democracies. I mean, David
[Guest]: Hume refuted this before there was
[Guest]: a United States government.
[Guest]: So, when you think about how consensual
[Guest]: transactions work, they have certain
[Guest]: features. Like, you have to have an
[Guest]: explicit agreement to do something.
[Guest]: There has to be a
[Guest]: quid pro quo, a tit for tat.
[Guest]: You have to provide one thing in exchange for the
[Guest]: others. And both sides have to
[Guest]: keep their end of the bargain. So, I like to
[Guest]: give examples using guitars. Like, I
[Guest]: go to a guitar center, a guitar store
[Guest]: chain in the United States, and I
[Guest]: go up to the salesperson, and I point to a guitar, and I
[Guest]: say, I will buy that guitar.
[Guest]: It's the case that I wasn't forced
[Guest]: to buy the guitar, and I had a reasonable way
[Guest]: of opting out. It wasn't as though they were
[Guest]: threatening to kill my family or hurt me if I didn't
[Guest]: buy it. It's also the case that
[Guest]: had I said, I don't want that guitar, the
[Guest]: transaction would have never taken place.
[Guest]: So, my active dissent stops the transaction
[Guest]: from taking place. And finally,
[Guest]: when I give them the money, they have
[Guest]: to give me the guitar. So, those are the
[Guest]: conditions. Like, there has to be an actual
[Guest]: ceremony where consent takes place.
[Guest]: I have to have a reasonable way of opting
[Guest]: out. Active dissent stops
[Guest]: the deal, and they have to do their part.
[Guest]: When it comes to government, none of
[Guest]: these conditions are met. There's never
[Guest]: a point where I signify my consent
[Guest]: to government. It's not like when I turn
[Guest]: 18, and I fill out my secret service
[Guest]: – no, sorry, not my secret service – my selective
[Guest]: service card that I thereby consent to government.
[Guest]: I am
[Guest]: forced to take their
[Guest]: services. I don't have a reasonable way of opting
[Guest]: out of them. They are threatening to hurt me
[Guest]: if I don't provide to them
[Guest]: taxes and other kinds of things.
[Guest]: If I say to them something like, no, no, you
[Guest]: don't understand. I don't consent to this particular
[Guest]: law. I don't consent to this election.
[Guest]: I don't consent to the government in general.
[Guest]: They don't care. And finally,
[Guest]: they don't actually even do a quid pro quo. In the
[Guest]: U.S., and this is true of other countries as well,
[Guest]: the governments don't have an
[Guest]: active duty to protect you.
[Guest]: They have a general obligation,
[Guest]: legally speaking, to generally provide
[Guest]: for the public welfare, but they don't
[Guest]: have an obligation to protect you. So we have a
[Guest]: couple of famous Supreme Court cases in the U.S.
[Guest]: that basically take the form of
[Guest]: a person calls the police and says
[Guest]: – this actually happened in Washington, D.C., where I
[Guest]: work – a woman calls the police and says,
[Guest]: two men have broken into my
[Guest]: apartment. They're going to attack me. And the
[Guest]: police say, well, we're not coming to help you.
[Guest]: We can't help you. They hurt her.
[Guest]: They rape her, and they rape her roommate.
[Guest]: She later sues the government and says,
[Guest]: you didn't do your part. I'm paying
[Guest]: taxes and so on for you to protect me.
[Guest]: You didn't protect me. It goes all the way
[Guest]: up to the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court
[Guest]: says, no, they didn't have an obligation to protect
[Guest]: you. They just have a general obligation to protect
[Guest]: people in general. So some people then
[Guest]: say, well, okay, it's not explicit
[Guest]: consent. It's hypothetical
[Guest]: consent. It's tacit consent.
[Guest]: But even then, it doesn't seem to work.
[Guest]: Hypothetical consent is important
[Guest]: in things like,
[Guest]: if you are brought to the emergency room
[Guest]: unconscious, and the doctors have to
[Guest]: decide whether to operate on you, then they
[Guest]: think something like, well,
[Guest]: if you were conscious,
[Guest]: we think you would agree. We don't have any evidence that you
[Guest]: wouldn't, so we're going to start operating
[Guest]: on you. But if you wake up and you say, no,
[Guest]: I'm a Jehovah's Witness. I don't believe in
[Guest]: blood transfusion, then they're going to
[Guest]: stop. So active dissent kills
[Guest]: that. And people will say things like,
[Guest]: well, like Socrates
[Guest]: in the, not the Apology,
[Guest]: the Crito, is asked, well, why is he accepting
[Guest]: this punishment when he knows the punishment is unjust?
[Guest]: And his main argument is, I've tacitly
[Guest]: consented to agree to the rules
[Guest]: of government because I
[Guest]: could have moved, and I didn't.
[Guest]: And I don't know whether that's a good argument for
[Guest]: Socrates in the year, you know, back in 300
[Guest]: BC, but it doesn't really seem
[Guest]: to apply now because here,
[Guest]: very few people have the right to move to another country.
[Guest]: So even the fact that I stayed put
[Guest]: in the United States and didn't leave doesn't
[Guest]: really prove that I've agreed to abide
[Guest]: by their authority. I'm just kind of
[Guest]: stuck here. And I actually have more ability
[Guest]: to move to other countries than most other people. Most people
[Guest]: have no permissibility to move at all.
[Guest]: They simply can't immigrate if they want to.
[Guest]: David Hume made fun of this by saying,
[Guest]: like, he's like, I want you to imagine that
[Guest]: you've been kidnapped
[Guest]: and you wake up and
[Guest]: you're on a ship in the middle of the ocean.
[Guest]: And the ship captain says, alright,
[Guest]: here's the deal. I'm the captain of the ship. If you want to be
[Guest]: on the ship, you have to follow my
[Guest]: orders. But if you don't like it, you can
[Guest]: feel free to leave. And he points to the water
[Guest]: surrounding you. It's like, well,
[Guest]: if you then decide to stay on the ship rather than
[Guest]: jump into the freezing water to get eaten
[Guest]: by sharks or drown, it's not
[Guest]: like you really consented. You didn't have any
[Amit Varma]: reasonable way of opting out of his rule.
[Amit Varma]: And that sounds exactly like the social
[Amit Varma]: contract to me. I mean, whenever people invoke
[Amit Varma]: that, I just tell them I didn't sign any contract.
[Amit Varma]: You've got a great line in your book which kind of sums us up.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, our relationship to government
[Amit Varma]: is no more analogous
[Amit Varma]: to a consensual contract than a red
[Amit Varma]: elephant is analogous to the number three.
[Guest]: Stop quote.
[Guest]: That's right. Just completely irrelevant. It's not at
[Amit Varma]: all consensual. There's like nothing
[Amit Varma]: to it that's consensual. Yeah, yeah. And one
[Amit Varma]: of those rare sort of LOL moments in the
[Amit Varma]: book. So moving on
[Amit Varma]: to sort of other arguments, you know, so
[Amit Varma]: we're going to take a quick commercial break. And when we come
[Amit Varma]: back, I'm going to try
[Amit Varma]: and pose a couple of arguments to you. And let's see
[Amit Varma]: how that goes. Sure.
[Unknown]: Hello, everybody. Welcome
[Unknown]: to another awesome week on the
[Unknown]: IVM Podcast Network. If you are not following
[Unknown]: us on social media, please make sure that you
[Unknown]: do. We are IVM Podcasts on Twitter, Facebook
[Unknown]: and Instagram. We'd like to thank the sponsors
[Unknown]: on our network, Storytel, Savari and
[Unknown]: Paytm Money for their support and really appreciate
[Unknown]: it. It's been a busy month at IVM.
[Unknown]: Last week, we launched three new shows. We launched
[Unknown]: 80KT Talent Tent. We launched Business
[Unknown]: Start Next in partnership with Bloomberg Quint
[Unknown]: and we launched Equity Saiyee in partnership with
[Unknown]: Moti Lal Oswal. And this week, we're going to
[Unknown]: bring back an old favorite. We're going to
[Unknown]: come back with the Empowering series after
[Unknown]: a fairly long hiatus. I hope that you guys
[Unknown]: enjoy that. Life Coach Zarina Poonawalla
[Unknown]: is joined by our co-founder Kavita
[Unknown]: Rajwade to discuss how you can put your game
[Unknown]: face on at your workplace. On
[Unknown]: Cyrus Says, media pioneer and first-generation
[Unknown]: entrepreneur Rani Skruwalla shares his journey
[Unknown]: with Cyrus. From humble beginnings to
[Unknown]: small steps in business to going on to establish
[Unknown]: UTV, RSVP and more. He
[Unknown]: also sheds light on his theater days,
[Unknown]: his parents and his new podcast, the Rani Skruwalla
[Unknown]: Podcast, right here on the IVM Network.
[Unknown]: On Simplified, join Chuck,
[Unknown]: Naren and Shriketh. Simplify the black holes
[Unknown]: and their importance in this universe. Vishvesh
[Unknown]: Kuttal joins Pawan and Ganesh on Thale Harate
[Unknown]: or Kannada Podcast to talk about his life as
[Unknown]: an associate professor at the Indian Institute
[Unknown]: of Science in Bengaluru. On the Pragati
[Unknown]: Podcast, V. Ravi Chandra joins host Pawan
[Unknown]: to share his experience of working with governments
[Unknown]: and sheds light on the challenges and constraints
[Unknown]: faced by government agencies, bureaucrats
[Unknown]: and politicians. On Croc Tales,
[Unknown]: Ana narrates tales on the theme of Avengers
[Unknown]: Endgame. What would the endgame be in
[Unknown]: a layman's life? On the Sponge Podcast,
[Unknown]: Ambipanmeshwaran talks about the importance
[Unknown]: of demonstrating a greater degree of trust
[Unknown]: in a client and agency relationship.
[Unknown]: On IVM Likes, Abbas and Abidin
[Unknown]: are joined by the main cast of TVF's new
[Unknown]: series, Kota Factory. They give insights
[Unknown]: about the show and the inspirations of the
[Unknown]: writers and actors. On Echoes of India,
[Unknown]: Anirudh takes us on a tour through the ancient
[Unknown]: city of Ujjain, walking us through
[Unknown]: its sights and smells and introducing us to
[Unknown]: some of its eccentric people. And with
[Unknown]: that, let's move on with your shows.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Jason Brennan, the US
[Amit Varma]: philosopher about the ethics of
[Amit Varma]: resisting state injustice.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one of the examples that
[Amit Varma]: kind of struck me from among
[Amit Varma]: the many interesting thought experiments you pose in your book,
[Amit Varma]: I'll just read it out for the listeners.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, Walker is precedent. He initiates
[Amit Varma]: what is clearly an unjust war,
[Amit Varma]: though many people unreasonably believe it
[Amit Varma]: to be just. Under his command, the
[Amit Varma]: government kills tens of thousands of innocent
[Amit Varma]: civilians and soldiers in foreign
[Amit Varma]: countries. Thousands of domestic
[Amit Varma]: troops die in vain fighting
[Amit Varma]: Walker's wars. The war destroys massive
[Amit Varma]: amounts of property and wealth. Tens of
[Amit Varma]: thousands of civilians die from the war's fallout.
[Amit Varma]: Walker now plans to initiate
[Amit Varma]: another unjust war of the same sort
[Amit Varma]: in another country. Anne tries
[Amit Varma]: to use peaceful means to stop the war,
[Amit Varma]: but these fail. Anne intervenes.
[Amit Varma]: She kills Walker with a sniper rifle.
[Amit Varma]: As a result, this stops the next war
[Amit Varma]: since Walker's successor is less belligerent.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the point you seem to be making here
[Amit Varma]: is a fairly straightforward one that
[Amit Varma]: you know, Walker's bad policies
[Amit Varma]: are costing thousands of lives
[Amit Varma]: both of, you know, his own
[Amit Varma]: people and of people in other countries
[Amit Varma]: and it is Anne's
[Amit Varma]: moral duty and if not her duty
[Amit Varma]: she at least has the right to intervene
[Amit Varma]: and stop Walker and do whatever it takes.
[Amit Varma]: So, my question sort of here
[Amit Varma]: is, I mean, this is again
[Amit Varma]: you know, the most common argument
[Amit Varma]: against consequentialism seems to be
[Amit Varma]: epistemic arguments that
[Amit Varma]: geopolitics is so deeply complex,
[Amit Varma]: everything has such unintended
[Amit Varma]: consequences. How can
[Amit Varma]: Anne or even Walker for that matter
[Amit Varma]: possibly fathom how
[Amit Varma]: all the chips will eventually fall and
[Amit Varma]: you know, what will actually
[Amit Varma]: be the consequence of those actions?
[Guest]: Yeah, it's a good question
[Guest]: and there are some worries about this.
[Guest]: So, let's break it down to a few
[Guest]: different things. So, one is
[Guest]: there might be reasons to defer to police
[Guest]: officers or to government
[Guest]: agents that are epistemic, not
[Guest]: because they have moral authority, but they
[Guest]: have epistemic authority. So, if I'm
[Guest]: crossing the street and I see two police
[Guest]: officers beating up somebody
[Guest]: and then I look and down the street
[Guest]: I see two random guys
[Guest]: the same age beating up a third person
[Guest]: I'm more likely to think that the
[Guest]: police officers are justified than
[Guest]: the random other people. I'm more likely to think that
[Guest]: when it's just civilians beating up another
[Guest]: civilian, it's a mugging. When police
[Guest]: officers doing it, they had some reason.
[Guest]: Because, just because of things we know
[Guest]: about people's behavior,
[Guest]: it's true that sometimes government agents
[Guest]: have more information than we do and in light of that
[Guest]: information, things will be justifiable
[Guest]: but we don't have access to that information.
[Guest]: So, we do have to worry about that kind of stuff
[Guest]: and I have some things to say about that in the book.
[Guest]: There's also some worries about
[Guest]: not knowing the consequences of what you
[Guest]: might do, though I think
[Guest]: that that generally helps with self-defense
[Guest]: rather than not. So,
[Guest]: if you take the
[Guest]: canonical statement of the right of self-defense
[Guest]: or the right to defend others is
[Guest]: a person has the right to
[Guest]: defend himself against an aggressor
[Guest]: when he reasonably believes
[Guest]: that doing so is necessary to
[Guest]: stop the aggressor from severely
[Guest]: violating his rights or causing severe
[Guest]: harm. That's sort of the canonical
[Guest]: statement. The right to defend others is
[Guest]: the same thing. You just change it from self-defense
[Guest]: to defending others and there's questions
[Guest]: about exactly what the line is about
[Guest]: reasonable, but what's interesting about
[Guest]: case law and I think most people's
[Guest]: intuitions is that
[Guest]: uncertainty is supposed to fall upon
[Guest]: the aggressor, not upon the person who's
[Guest]: defending themselves. So, there's a nice case
[Guest]: like this in the U.S.
[Guest]: There's one person, the aggressor
[Guest]: is mugging a second person.
[Guest]: The aggressor is beating him up and the second
[Guest]: person is reasonably in fear of his life.
[Guest]: The aggressor reaches into his pocket
[Guest]: and it looks like he's reaching for
[Guest]: a gun. It turns out that the person
[Guest]: who's being picked on also has a weapon.
[Guest]: He takes out his weapon and he kills the first
[Guest]: person, the aggressor.
[Guest]: But it turns out he's wrong. In fact, he's
[Guest]: actually reaching for cigarettes.
[Guest]: I think this guy's going to shoot me. He's actually
[Guest]: just reaching for cigarettes. I pull out my gun and I shoot
[Guest]: him. It goes to court and they decide
[Guest]: it's justifiable homicide. They said,
[Guest]: in light of the violence being enacted against you,
[Guest]: it was reasonable for you to think he was
[Guest]: going to get a weapon against you and
[Guest]: the harm should fall upon him,
[Guest]: not on you. You're the one that's the victim.
[Guest]: As the victim, you benefit
[Guest]: from uncertainty. It should not be that the aggressor
[Guest]: benefits from uncertainty.
[Guest]: If you believe in moral parity, then
[Guest]: I think the same thing applies to government.
[Guest]: It certainly could be the case
[Guest]: that the next time we have something like the Iraq
[Guest]: invasion, when the government says,
[Guest]: they really do have weapons of mass
[Guest]: destruction and if we don't invade them, it's going
[Guest]: to be dangerous for everybody. It's possible
[Guest]: that that's true, but I think
[Guest]: the dangers of the uncertainty have
[Guest]: to fall upon them, not upon us,
[Guest]: not upon civilians.
[Guest]: When you think about the
[Guest]: problem of uncertainty, this is one of the reasons
[Guest]: why I would be, practically speaking,
[Guest]: a pacifist. My friend Brian Kaplan,
[Guest]: he's an economist down the street from me,
[Guest]: he's not a pacifist in the sense of
[Guest]: believing violence is never justified.
[Guest]: He says, as a matter of government policy,
[Guest]: it's a good default position
[Guest]: because wars almost never
[Guest]: work out the way they're intended to.
[Guest]: It always ends up being more costly
[Guest]: than they expected. They kill lots of civilians
[Guest]: who they weren't supposed to kill.
[Guest]: The dangers are much higher.
[Guest]: There really are
[Guest]: net benefits to these wars.
[Guest]: Even things like, take World War I.
[Guest]: The United States intervenes in World War I.
[Guest]: Maybe that's part of the reason
[Guest]: why
[Guest]: the Allies beat
[Guest]: the Central Powers.
[Guest]: As a result of that, what happens?
[Guest]: We get Nazi Germany, we get
[Guest]: the Soviet Union, we have another massive
[Guest]: World War. It's not clear that this
[Guest]: intervention was on net positive.
[Guest]: It might very well be the case
[Guest]: that had the US just stepped back and done nothing,
[Guest]: the world would have been a much better place
[Guest]: with fewer authoritarian
[Guest]: governments and far fewer people dying.
[Guest]: I think, yes, there's
[Guest]: questions about thinking of that. One other final
[Guest]: bit that I think, because I said this is really multiple
[Guest]: questions stuck together. Sometimes we have
[Guest]: to worry about what you might call the problem of
[Guest]: fallout. Fannie Kaplan
[Guest]: tried to assassinate Lenin
[Guest]: back in, I think the year was 1919
[Guest]: or 1921. Anyway,
[Guest]: she tries to assassinate Vladimir Lenin
[Guest]: early on in the Soviet regime.
[Guest]: His reaction was to engage in a massive
[Guest]: terror purge and to murder something like
[Guest]: another million people.
[Guest]: One question we have to ask is,
[Guest]: if you know that governments might respond
[Guest]: badly to your threats, to your
[Guest]: attempts to stop them, does that
[Guest]: provide you with an obligation not to intervene?
[Guest]: I think that's really not special to
[Guest]: government. I think this is another case where it's parallel
[Guest]: to cases with civilians.
[Guest]: If I'm bullying you on
[Guest]: the schoolyard and you fight back
[Guest]: and I credibly say to you,
[Guest]: if you fight back against me, you don't allow me to steal your
[Guest]: lunch money, well, I'm going to go beat up two other
[Guest]: people and take their lunch money. Do you have
[Guest]: an obligation to let me then beat you up?
[Amit Varma]: Or are you allowed to defend yourself?
[Amit Varma]: Right, so following on from the thought
[Amit Varma]: of uncertainty, you know, another
[Amit Varma]: question, and I'll come at it from a probabilistic
[Amit Varma]: point of view. Let's say that
[Amit Varma]: Walker is the president, in your hypothetical
[Amit Varma]: example, and he's planning to
[Amit Varma]: go to war. Now, Anne's
[Amit Varma]: certainty of whether this
[Amit Varma]: will be harmful or not can be anywhere between
[Amit Varma]: 0-100%. If it's 0, she
[Amit Varma]: does nothing, there's no case for her to do anything.
[Amit Varma]: If it's 100 and millions of people will die
[Amit Varma]: if she's 100% sure, then she'll feel
[Amit Varma]: the obligation to stop him. But the truth
[Amit Varma]: is that in the real world, our knowledge is never
[Amit Varma]: 0 or 100. So the question is
[Amit Varma]: A, for Anne to actually
[Amit Varma]: intervene in that situation,
[Amit Varma]: where do you draw the line? How sure
[Amit Varma]: does her knowledge have to be and how do
[Amit Varma]: we account for the human biases
[Amit Varma]: that play into that situation? For example,
[Amit Varma]: the president could be Republican and
[Amit Varma]: she's from the Green Party, so
[Amit Varma]: those biases also come into it.
[Amit Varma]: And as a follow-up to that, if you
[Amit Varma]: are thinking of defending
[Amit Varma]: yourself or others against
[Amit Varma]: either a civilian or
[Amit Varma]: an agent of the government, do the
[Amit Varma]: numbers shift? Should you assign
[Amit Varma]: a lower probability of
[Amit Varma]: certainty to the agent
[Amit Varma]: of the state because they could have
[Guest]: a legitimate reason? Yeah, these are
[Guest]: all good questions. I'd say the reasonable
[Guest]: person standard for self-defense,
[Guest]: I'd say it's more like a 50%.
[Guest]: You think you're about
[Guest]: 50% certain that this is going to
[Guest]: cause some sort of severe rights
[Guest]: violation, then you can intervene.
[Guest]: I think that's around the number. It doesn't have to be close
[Guest]: to 100. In terms of deference,
[Guest]: I think it does make a difference whom you're
[Guest]: dealing with. So I trust
[Guest]: the Swedish government more than I trust the American
[Guest]: government, and I trust the American government
[Guest]: more than I trust the Indian government.
[Guest]: So when you told me early on that
[Guest]: there's a very strong culture of deference
[Guest]: to authority and a tendency to put government
[Guest]: up on a pedestal in India, I find that
[Guest]: surprising because when you look at things like
[Guest]: Transparency International's
[Guest]: measurement of government corruption or
[Guest]: various measures of the degree
[Guest]: of rent-seeking, which is like special interest
[Guest]: lobbying, you tend to find that India has
[Guest]: lots of corruption and lots of special
[Guest]: interest rent-seeking.
[Guest]: So depending on who your government is,
[Guest]: and I'm not saying that to be anti-Indian,
[Guest]: I'm bashing the United States here
[Unknown]: too. I celebrate
[Guest]: Independence Day. For what it's worth,
[Guest]: I don't wave flags on Independence Day, so I'm
[Guest]: not rah-rah-rah here. But it does
[Guest]: make a difference, the government
[Guest]: in question. So if you're worried
[Guest]: about, say, Russian intervention, it's more reasonably
[Guest]: worried about Russian intervention than, say, Swedish
[Guest]: intervention, just because of the track record of that
[Guest]: government. But that's true of people too.
[Guest]: If I found out
[Guest]: that my wife was beating somebody up,
[Guest]: I would think that, just given what her behavior
[Guest]: is like and what I know about her,
[Guest]: it's much more likely that she had a
[Guest]: good reason to do that than, say,
[Guest]: some other people I know who I won't mention
[Guest]: who are just not very good people.
[Guest]: Yeah, you're right. The other thing you have to think about is
[Guest]: your own biases.
[Guest]: It's certainly true that when you look in the
[Guest]: U.S., at least, there's a nice book
[Guest]: on this called Party in the Streets by Fabio
[Guest]: Rojas, and I can't remember the name of his
[Guest]: co-author, but they looked at the
[Guest]: anti-war movement during
[Guest]: the Bush era, and they find that
[Guest]: the overall majority of these people who are
[Guest]: protesting during the Bush era are
[Guest]: not genuinely anti-war. They're just
[Guest]: anti-Bush. They're Democratic operatives
[Guest]: or they're part of the Democratic Party, and they
[Guest]: don't like what Bush is doing.
[Guest]: Only a very small minority are
[Guest]: sincerely against the Iraq War.
[Guest]: So, if Obama had
[Guest]: done the same thing, they would never have protested,
[Guest]: but the people who are sincerely against it would have.
[Guest]: So, when we were making these decisions,
[Guest]: yeah, you have to be aware of your own biases, including
[Guest]: not only your bias to
[Guest]: not give people credit or to be against
[Guest]: them, but also your bias to defer to authority
[Guest]: too, which again, we're all...
[Guest]: If you know about the Milgram experiment, you know that the average
[Guest]: person will execute another person when
[Guest]: they're told to do so.
[Guest]: These are all the things to take into account.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting when you talk about the
[Amit Varma]: threshold of 50% or the number
[Amit Varma]: could be anything, but I'd contend that
[Amit Varma]: before you act, before you
[Amit Varma]: decide, should I act in self-defense
[Amit Varma]: or the defense of others, and you decide
[Amit Varma]: that, okay, 50% is my threshold,
[Amit Varma]: that 50% is 50% only before
[Amit Varma]: you actually act. After you act, it's
[Amit Varma]: either 100 or 0, because you're going to rationalize
[Amit Varma]: what you did. If you act and you intervene,
[Amit Varma]: say, if Ann kills Walker, she's always
[Amit Varma]: going to say, I was 100% sure. And
[Amit Varma]: if she doesn't do anything, she'll say, hey,
[Amit Varma]: you know, not sure what can I do.
[Amit Varma]: People don't think in
[Amit Varma]: probabilistic ways and think through
[Amit Varma]: these things. I mean, if you...
[Amit Varma]: And this kind of brings me on to the next question
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, once we
[Amit Varma]: agree that we need a sort
[Amit Varma]: of state, however minimal, but a state
[Amit Varma]: with a monopoly on violence to protect our
[Amit Varma]: rights, doesn't it automatically
[Amit Varma]: mean not that they get special immunity,
[Amit Varma]: but that the threshold against
[Amit Varma]: that government is
[Amit Varma]: slightly higher? Because otherwise
[Amit Varma]: if you give, if it is widely
[Amit Varma]: considered morally permissible to resist,
[Amit Varma]: then anyone with any random conspiracy
[Amit Varma]: theory or any kind of grievance
[Amit Varma]: can rationalize that to do
[Amit Varma]: absolutely anything. So to get
[Amit Varma]: society
[Amit Varma]: running in an orderly way,
[Amit Varma]: isn't it necessary to have a slightly
[Amit Varma]: higher threshold to resist government action
[Guest]: than otherwise? I don't think
[Guest]: so, but for a couple
[Guest]: of reasons. I think there's, we're conflating
[Guest]: two possible distinctions here, two distinct
[Guest]: things. One is, what's
[Guest]: the truth? And the other is, what's useful
[Guest]: for people to believe?
[Guest]: So, suppose
[Guest]: we need a government and it should do certain
[Guest]: things. Like, the cases where
[Guest]: I think violence or other kinds of action would be
[Guest]: justifiable are cases where governments are doing
[Guest]: stuff they shouldn't be doing, like
[Guest]: violating your rights in various ways, hurting people,
[Guest]: shooting people who are pro-
[Guest]: I mean, again, you can go on YouTube and see a bunch
[Guest]: of cases where you can watch an American police
[Guest]: officer put someone on the ground, on
[Guest]: their belly, with their handcuffs tied
[Guest]: behind their back, and then shoot them.
[Guest]: And it's like, he's no possible
[Guest]: threat. He's not even a threat to a toddler at this
[Guest]: point. He can't do anything.
[Guest]: These are cases where, like, how could
[Guest]: deference to that possibly be really useful
[Guest]: to get government going? If anything, it's just
[Guest]: permitting government to do too much. It's
[Guest]: dangerous. But that
[Guest]: said, it's true that if you
[Guest]: give people a theory about what they ought
[Guest]: to do, they might misapply it.
[Guest]: This is a problem with consequentialist theories in
[Guest]: general. I'm not saying that my theory is consequentialist, but
[Guest]: just to give you an example. So,
[Guest]: consequentialist theories say you should make
[Guest]: decisions based upon cost-benefit analysis,
[Guest]: do what provides the best outcomes,
[Guest]: and then an objection to that is,
[Guest]: yeah, but people are stupid, and they're not good at
[Guest]: cost-benefit analysis, and many times when people
[Guest]: try to do it, they'll get the wrong answer.
[Guest]: The thing that utilitarians will say is,
[Guest]: that's true, and so for many people
[Guest]: it's useful if they simply believe in certain
[Guest]: rules of thumb. So there's a distinction
[Guest]: between what you can call the
[Guest]: criterion of right action, which is the
[Guest]: truth about what makes actions right and wrong,
[Guest]: versus what's a useful decision
[Guest]: procedure for people to use on the ground,
[Guest]: because the best decision
[Guest]: procedure is specific to
[Guest]: you. It's given your psychological
[Guest]: biases, what ways, modes of thinking
[Guest]: make it most likely you'll do the right
[Guest]: thing, as described by the correct theory,
[Guest]: whatever that is. You find this,
[Guest]: it's not even just a problem in, say, morality, it's a problem
[Guest]: in sports. So,
[Guest]: I don't want to use another American example, but I guess I will,
[Guest]: in baseball, if a person
[Guest]: hits a fly ball into the outfield,
[Guest]: the truth of the matter about where that
[Guest]: fly ball is going to land is given by
[Guest]: a number of equations in physics. You have
[Guest]: a complicated vector equation that tells you
[Guest]: exactly where the ball is going to land.
[Guest]: As an outfielder, you can't
[Guest]: use these physics equations, because you
[Guest]: don't have access to all the information you need to solve
[Guest]: them, and even if you did, if you knew all the initial
[Guest]: conditions, the angle, the spin of the ball,
[Guest]: the air pressure, etc.,
[Guest]: the angle at which the ball is hit,
[Guest]: with what velocity it was thrown, and so on, even if you
[Guest]: knew all that, you couldn't do the mathematics
[Guest]: in your head fast enough to catch the ball.
[Guest]: So, what people use on the ground is
[Guest]: something called the gaze heuristic, which is a
[Guest]: on-the-ground heuristic that helps them
[Guest]: catch the ball. It tracks the truth,
[Guest]: even though it's not itself the correct
[Guest]: theory. So, I think that's true
[Guest]: of this theory as well.
[Guest]: It's true that if
[Guest]: conspiracy theorists read this, they're going to
[Guest]: think, ah, I'm justified in doing all
[Guest]: sorts of bad things against government.
[Guest]: That's not what the theory implies. It's
[Guest]: misapplying the theory.
[Guest]: So, it might be that it's useful for people to
[Guest]: have some degree of conformist
[Guest]: behavior, even though
[Guest]: in reality, the conformity isn't
[Amit Varma]: justifiable. You also have a chapter
[Amit Varma]: on your book on how
[Amit Varma]: it can sometimes be your duty to not follow
[Amit Varma]: unjust orders. And, you
[Amit Varma]: know, some of the examples for this, you
[Amit Varma]: know, will draw us to that intuitively. For
[Amit Varma]: example, you cannot sign a contract with somebody else
[Amit Varma]: to kill a third person because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you can't infringe on the third person's rights anyway.
[Amit Varma]: So, that kind of contract is
[Amit Varma]: invalid. But how does one act during
[Amit Varma]: war? If your country is attacked,
[Amit Varma]: for example, and there is a war and you
[Amit Varma]: choose to serve, while being choosed to
[Amit Varma]: serve, I would assume that it is
[Amit Varma]: normatively desirable for everyone who is serving
[Amit Varma]: to just follow orders because otherwise
[Amit Varma]: the system breaks down. Everyone can't think
[Amit Varma]: for themselves. So, how do you, and
[Amit Varma]: in the form of war, you can never divine
[Amit Varma]: what actions are just or unjust.
[Amit Varma]: So, how does one deal with that?
[Guest]: Yeah, that's a good question. I mean,
[Guest]: my most basic presumption would be something like
[Guest]: given how war has gone
[Guest]: through history, if you're fighting, you're probably
[Guest]: doing the wrong thing. There have been very
[Guest]: few cases in history where the soldiers
[Guest]: who are fighting should be fighting.
[Guest]: So, pretty much,
[Guest]: in almost any of the European wars that happened,
[Guest]: they just weren't justifiable
[Guest]: on either side. You're just having land grabs
[Guest]: by various noblemen.
[Guest]: You shouldn't be killing those soldiers and they shouldn't be killing
[Guest]: you. The best argument you can
[Guest]: have is just, well, I've been conscripted and if I
[Guest]: don't fight, they're going to hurt me or hurt my family.
[Guest]: If your country has actually been
[Guest]: invaded and they're
[Guest]: attacking, then you
[Guest]: have things like, that's when
[Guest]: just war theory comes in. You can think,
[Guest]: well, we're allowed to use defensive action to repel
[Guest]: them. If I'm attacking
[Guest]: combatants who are clearly in uniform
[Guest]: and they're clearly the invaders, then that's
[Guest]: fine. The problem, though, is
[Guest]: usually, when people are fighting wars
[Guest]: that are supposedly in self-defense, they're
[Guest]: usually invading another country. Governments
[Guest]: love to take out just
[Guest]: war theory and then say that this
[Guest]: invasion that we're doing of another country is actually
[Guest]: preemptive, self-defense. They're going to hurt
[Guest]: us. We have to stop them.
[Guest]: So, yeah, I think
[Guest]: it's not really that hard.
[Guest]: Most of the time, you shouldn't be fighting
[Guest]: and if you're genuinely being invaded, then you
[Guest]: can shoot at the people in the other uniform.
[Guest]: When they wave the white flag, then you
[Guest]: stop. You don't kill their civilians. You don't
[Guest]: bomb their people. You don't kill their babies.
[Guest]: You don't use chemicals against them.
[Guest]: You don't shoot at people in a village
[Guest]: who are unarmed.
[Guest]: You just shoot combatants on the battlefield
[Guest]: and then when they leave your country, then
[Guest]: you're good. It's over.
[Amit Varma]: Well, we're almost at the end of our time because
[Amit Varma]: we had one hour and
[Amit Varma]: I'd urge all my listeners to read your book.
[Amit Varma]: There's a lot that we haven't covered. For example,
[Amit Varma]: not just should we follow orders?
[Amit Varma]: Is it okay to deceive voters?
[Amit Varma]: The question of does one have a
[Amit Varma]: duty that is an obligation to resist
[Amit Varma]: or does one merely have
[Amit Varma]: the right to resist? I want to end with one
[Amit Varma]: final question, though, which is
[Amit Varma]: and I don't think you addressed it in your book.
[Guest]: Should we pay taxes? Yeah,
[Guest]: I guess, you know, at the end of the day, I'm very sympathetic
[Guest]: to anarchism, like genuine, full-blown
[Guest]: anarchism. I think anarchy can work
[Guest]: better than people give it credit for. There's a nice
[Guest]: book on this by Peter Leeson called
[Guest]: is it called
[Guest]: Two Cheers for Anarchism? Yeah, Two Cheers
[Guest]: for Anarchism, Why Anarchy Works Better Than You Think.
[Guest]: That said,
[Guest]: you know, I
[Guest]: think there's something to be said for the fair play
[Guest]: kind of argument. Governments are providing certain
[Guest]: kinds of benefits that you are getting
[Guest]: in return and even if it's not consensual,
[Guest]: it's reasonable
[Guest]: to do your part, but
[Guest]: even in light of that, that's only going to justify
[Guest]: some taxes, not usually the amount
[Guest]: of taxes that we're paying. So,
[Guest]: if I'm paying a sugar tariff, there's no reason
[Guest]: for me to pay that. That's just simply unjust.
[Guest]: If I'm paying to support
[Guest]: a rent, a government rent, I shouldn't be
[Guest]: paying that. That's unjust. If I'm paying
[Guest]: for special interest things, that's unjust.
[Guest]: Most of the military expenditures in the United
[Guest]: States, I think, can't be justified. I shouldn't
[Guest]: have to pay for those. So,
[Guest]: yeah, I actually just
[Guest]: passed in my taxes today, interestingly.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: I think my tax bill for this year was
[Guest]: $54,000, not including
[Guest]: Medicare and Social Security.
[Guest]: So, that $54,000 I paid
[Guest]: to the US government and the other
[Guest]: 15,000 or so that I paid to the state
[Guest]: government, maybe 15
[Guest]: or 20 of that is justifiable and the rest is
[Amit Varma]: probably not. I think in India, a higher
[Amit Varma]: proportion would be not justifiable.
[Amit Varma]: Jason, thanks so much for
[Amit Varma]: giving me your time and chatting with me. I learned
[Guest]: a lot today. Yeah, thanks very much. I really appreciate it.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode,
[Amit Varma]: do hop over to your nearest online
[Amit Varma]: bookstore and buy Jason Brennan's excellent
[Amit Varma]: book, When All Else Fails.
[Amit Varma]: The book contains far more than this episode
[Amit Varma]: did. We barely scratched the surface of
[Amit Varma]: his arguments. You can follow me on
[Amit Varma]: Twitter at amitverma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen
[Amit Varma]: is supported by the Takshashila Institution
[Amit Varma]: and Independent Center for Research
[Amit Varma]: and Education in Public Policy. The
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila Institution offers 12-week courses
[Amit Varma]: in Public Policy, Technology Policy
[Amit Varma]: and Strategic Studies and for both
[Amit Varma]: full-time students and working professionals.
[Amit Varma]: Admissions for the May 2019
[Amit Varma]: batch are now open. Visit
[Amit Varma]: takshashila.org.in
[Amit Varma]: for more details.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse all our past episodes
[Amit Varma]: at seenunseen.in and thinkpragati.com
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: I walk you through my successes and failures,
[Unknown]: mostly my failures, and the lessons that I
[Unknown]: learned from my experiences, family
[Unknown]: and colleagues. What was my first
[Unknown]: entrepreneurial venture? Why I chose
[Unknown]: Japanese cartoons over animation cartoons
[Unknown]: on Hungama? Why did I sell my stake
[Unknown]: at UTV to Disney? Find
[Unknown]: out all this and more on the
[Unknown]: Ronnie Scruella podcast, Dreaming
[Unknown]: With Your Eyes Open. New episodes
[Unknown]: out every Tuesday on the
[Unknown]: IVM Podcasts app website
[Unknown]: or wherever you listen to podcasts.
[Unknown]: India's
[Unknown]: a massive subcontinent,
[Unknown]: home to truly stunning diversity.
[Unknown]: Behind the
[Unknown]: veils of smoke that obscure
[Unknown]: our thriving cities, our
[Unknown]: history is still alive, glimmering
[Unknown]: like sequins, waiting
[Unknown]: to be discovered. And if you,
[Unknown]: like me, are straining
[Unknown]: to hear the echoes of our past,
[Unknown]: this podcast is for
[Unknown]: you. I'm Anirudh Kanisetty,
[Unknown]: a history and geopolitics
[Unknown]: researcher, and I host Echoes of
[Unknown]: India, a history podcast about
[Unknown]: India, by Indians
[Unknown]: and for Indians. In
[Unknown]: Echoes, we journey through the
[Unknown]: complex histories of South Asia
[Unknown]: and what they can teach us about our
[Unknown]: globalised world. Tune in
[Unknown]: every Wednesday on ivmpodcast.com
[Unknown]: or your favourite podcast app.